# 5. for...of \[ETODO\]

_for..of_ and _for…in_ loops give us a very clean and concise syntax to iterate over **all kinds** of iterables and enumerables like strings, arrays and object literals. 



## Old `for` loop

```text
const array = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'];

for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
  console.log(array[i]);
}

// Result: a, b, c, d
```

In addition to this `for` loop, there are two other types of `for` iteration methods we can use: `for..in` and `for..of`.

## The `for..in` Statement

`for..in` is a method for iterating over "enumerable" properties of an object. It therefore applies to all objects \(not only `Object()`s\) that have these properties.

An enumerable property is defined as a property of an object that has an `Enumerable` value of true. Essentially, a property is "enumerable", if it is `enumerable`. We can check if a property is enumerable by calling `property.enumerable`, which will return true or false.

We use the `for..in` loop with the following syntax -

```text
for (variable in enumerable) {
	// do stuff
}
```

For example, to loop through and `console.log` all the values in this Object, we can do the following -

```text
const obj = {
	a: 1,
	b: 2,
	c: 3,
	d: 4
}

for (const key in obj) {
	console.log( obj[key] )
}

// Result: 1, 2, 3, 4
```

The `for ... in` loop will iterate over inherited properties as well, as long as they are enumerable properties. The `for ... in` iteration happens in an arbitrary order. Therefore, it should not be used if things need to happen in their defined sequence.

#### `for..in` and Objects <a id="forinandobjects"></a>

The `for..in` method provides us the most straightforward way to loop over Object keys and values, since Objects do not have access to the `forEach` method that Arrays do.

#### `for..in` and Arrays <a id="forinandarrays"></a>

The "key" for values in an Array are the numerical indexes. Therefore, these indexes are essentially just enumerable properties, like Object keys, except they are integers instead of strings.

This means that we can loop over all the values in an Array by retrieving their index using the `for..in` Array.

```text
const array = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'];

for (const index in array) {
	console.log(array[index])
}

// Result: a, b, c, d
```

However, it is generally advised that `for..in` not be used with Arrays, particularly because it cannot be guaranteed that the iteration happens in sequence, which is usually important for Arrays.

#### `for..in` and Strings <a id="forinandstrings"></a>

Each character in a string has an index. Therefore, similar to Arrays, the indexes are enumerable properties that just happen to be integers.

```text
const string = 'Ire Aderinokun';

for (const index in string) {
    console.log(string[index])
}

// Result: I, r, e, , A, d, e, r, i, n, o, k, u, n
```

## The `for..of` Statement

`for..of` is a method, introduced in ES2015, for iterating over "iterable collections". These are objects that have a `[Symbol.iterator]` property.

The `[Symbol.iterator]` property allows us to manually iterate over the collection by calling the `[Symbol.iterator]().next()` method to retrieve the next item in the collection.

```text
const array = ['a','b','c', 'd'];
const iterator = array[Symbol.iterator]();
console.log( iterator.next().value )
console.log( iterator.next().value )
console.log( iterator.next().value )
console.log( iterator.next().value )

// Result: a, b, c, d
```

The `for..of` syntax is essentially a wrapper around the `[Symbol.iterator]` to create loops. It uses the following syntax -

```text
for (variable of iterable) {
	// do stuff
}
```

#### `for..of` and Objects \*\*\*\*\*\* \[NOT POSSIBLE\] <a id="forofandobjects"></a>

The `for..of` loop doesn't work with Objects because they are not "iterable", and therefore don't have a `[Symbol.iterator]` property.

But we can covert as Entries and use for..of

The **`Object.entries()`** method returns an array of a given object's own enumerable string-keyed property `[key, value]` pairs, in the same order as that provided by a [`for...in`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/for...in) loop \(the difference being that a for-in loop enumerates properties in the prototype chain as well\). The order of the array returned by **Object.entries\(\)** does not depend on how an object is defined. If there is a need for certain ordering then the array should be sorted first like `Object.entries(obj).sort((a, b) => b[0].localeCompare(a[0]));`.

{% tabs %}
{% tab title="Basic" %}
```javascript
const object1 = {
  a: 'somestring',
  b: 42
};

for (let [key, value] of Object.entries(object1)) {
  console.log(`${key}: ${value}`);
}

// expected output:
// "a: somestring"
// "b: 42"
// order is not guaranteed
```
{% endtab %}

{% tab title="Ordered" %}
```javascript
const object1 = {
  a: 'somestring',
  b: 42
};
// ordered entries -by key
const orderedEntries = Object.entries(obj).sort((a, b) => b[0].localeCompare(a[0]));
for (let [key, value] of orderedEntries) {
  console.log(`${key}: ${value}`);
}

// expected output:
// "a: somestring"
// "b: 42"
// order is not guaranteed
```
{% endtab %}
{% endtabs %}

#### `for..of` and Arrays/Strings <a id="forofandarraysstrings"></a>

The `for..of` loop works well with Arrays and Strings, as they are iterable. This method is a more reliable way of looping through an Array in sequence.

```text
const array = ['a', 'b', 'c', 'd'];
for (const item of array) {
	console.log(item)
}
// Result: a, b, c, d

const string = 'Ire Aderinokun';
for (const character of string) {
	console.log(character)
}
// Result: I, r, e, , A, d, e, r, i, n, o, k, u, n
```

#### `for..of` and NodeLists <a id="forofandnodelists"></a>

Finally, another really useful case for `for..of` is in iterating of NodeLists. When we query the document for a group of elements, what we get returned is a NodeList, not an Array. This means that we can't iterate over the list using Array methods like `forEach`.

To solve this, we can either convert it to an Array using `Array.from()`, or use the `for..of` loop, which is applicable to more than just Arrays.

```text
const elements = document.querySelectorAll('.foo');

for (const element of elements) {
    element.addEventListener('click', doSomething);
}
```

## A Comparison

|  | `for..in` | `for..of` |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Applies to | Enumerable Properties | Iterable Collections |
| Use with Objects? | Yes | No |
| Use with Arrays? | Yes, but not advised | Yes |
| Use with Strings? | Yes, but not advised | Yes |



