# 1

## 1. position: `static` vs `relative` vs `absolute` vs `fixed`

* Elements are positioned using the top, bottom, left, and right properties. 
* However, these properties will not work unless the `position` property is set first. 
* They also work differently depending on the position value.

### position: static;

* all HTML elements are `position: static;` by `default`.
* Static positioned elements are not affected by the top, bottom, left, and right properties.
* it is always positioned according to the normal flow of the page:

### position: relative;

* An element with `position: relative;` is positioned **relative** to its _**normal position**_.
* Setting the top, right, bottom, and left properties of a relatively-positioned element will cause it to be adjusted away from its normal position. 
* `Other content` **will not be adjusted** to fit into any gap left by the element.

### position: fixed;

* An element with `position: fixed;` is positioned relative to the viewport, 
* which means it **always stays in the 'same place'** even if the page is **scrolled**. 
* The top, right, bottom, and left properties are used to position the element.
* A fixed element does not leave a gap in the page where it would normally have been located.

### position: absolute;

* An element with `position: absolute;` is positioned relative to the **nearest positioned ancestor** 
  * \(instead of positioned relative to the viewport, like fixed\).
* However; if an absolute positioned element has no positioned ancestors, 
  * it uses the document body, and moves along with page scrolling.

## 2. `display: none` vs `visibility: hidden`

* `display: none;`  means element will not be present in Render Tree
* `visibility: hidden;`  element will  be present in Render Tree \(but will not be visible to the user\)



## 3. What is Shadow DOM?

* Shadow DOM is a separate DOM tree of elements that we can create
  * thats is NOT part of main document DOM tree
  * when we render, it behaves like, it is part of main document DOM tree
  * 

Advantages:

* CSS rules are applied globally, 
  * If we include some external library, our styles may get be impacted
  * there is NO way we can specify styles only to this particular element
    * except: parent child selectors
*  Shadow DOM provides local scoping
  * your shadow DOM code doesn't affect other DOM elements
* 
